## Introduction

Sarracenia are fairly easy to grow from seed if you have patience. Each step in producing the seed, germinating it, and growing the plants takes patience. It takes at least 4 years to go from a just-pollinated flower to a mature, blooming plant. Don't even think about how old you will be or what you will be doing in 4 years. Just do it for the adventure.

Sarracenia seedlings make excellent indoor plants. For the first two years you can grow seedlings under lights without dormancy. In fact, if you give them enough light and enough food, after two years you will have plants the size of four-year-old plants grown outside with dormancy. It may even bloom in its fourth year of growth.

## Pollination
Sarracenia flowers usually appear in the spring slightly ahead of or with the first pitchers. The very elaborate flowers do not self pollinate. They need certain species of bumblebees for pollination services. In many areas, there are no pollinators that know how to work the flowers or the plants bloom too early for there to be any pollinators around. If you don't pollinate the flowers yourself, it will not happen and you will not get any seeds. This can actually be good when you are doing crosses. You will not need to bag flower to keep them from being pollinated naturally. However, if you do have bumblebees that pollinate the flowers, you will need to bag flowers with a mesh bag if you want to make specific crosses.

## Germinating seed
Sarracenia seed is rather odd. It has a waxy coating making it hydrophobic, most likely to help with dispersal in nature by floating on water. This also makes it difficult to germinate quickly. The seed can't germinate until you get moisture past the wax and seed coat into the embryo. You waited how many months to get the seed and you want the plants NOW! Relax.

There are all sorts of claims about quick methods of germinating Sarracenia seeds. DON'T WASTE YOUR TIME OR SEEDS. Yes, you will get some germination but to get good germination you need to properly stratify the seeds.

The tried and true way of germinating Sarracenia seed is to cold stratify the seed for 4 weeks (5 weeks for Sarracenia purpurea subsp. purpurea). Storing the seed dry in the refrigerator isn't stratification. Stratification is storing the seed in a cold and damp environment usually with natural materials that may aid the process of convincing the seed it is time to start growing. The easiest method is to refrigerate seeds in a small plastic bag with a few strands of finely chopped sphagnum moss dampened with purified water. Live sphagnum is the best choice. The moss should be wet enough so that if you squeeze it you will see water but there shouldn't be any free water in the bag. If you don't have live or dried sphagnum moss and must use peatmoss, get it very wet then squeeze it to remove most of the water and make sure there is plenty of air in the plastic bag. The seeds need air.



### A few words about soils for Sarracenia.
Sphagnum moss is generally recommended as the best medium for Sarracenia. Sphagnum moss is hard to find, very expensive, and not always harvested in a sustainable manner. Quite often moss sold as Sphagnum is actually a sheet moss that can be problematic for growing Sarracenia.

Soil mixes with peat are more than adequate for Sarracenia. In fact Sarracenia rubra, S. psittacina, S. rosea and most hybrids prefer being in a peat mix. Keep in mind though, with a peat mix you need to top water the plants and change the water in the trays occasionally. How often depends on your water quality, how often you water your plants, and exactly which mix you use.

The most common peat mix is equal parts peat and silica sand. The peat needs to be sphagnum peat which is decomposed sphagnum moss. Try to get horticultural grade peat. The peat typically found in garden centers is everything but horticultural grade if it comes from a company that sells different grades of peat. If you can't get horticultural grade peat, consider brands that specialize in potting soil mixes based on peat. The sand should be fairly coarse and about the same size grains. With fine particle sand, the soil can become like concrete. Sieved, coarse, washed "play sand" can work. Horticultural sand and 12 to 16 mesh silica sand blasting sand are best. Sand may need to be soaked for a while in purified water to help remove the salts. The salt gets into the sand during processing because water is sprayed on the material to reduce the dust. Breathing silica dust from sand is dangerous to your health.

Many members have great success using perlite instead of sand in their soil mixes. For others it can be disastrous. The differences seem to be whether the perlite itself is salty or has added fertilizer. It is important that pots with perlite get top watered regularly or are allowed to get rained on. If you do use perlite, and I do, absolutely make sure there is no fertilizer added to the perlite. The usual suspects for adding fertilizer are companies that also sell fertilizer. The fertilizer cannot be easily washed out. Also when using perlite, keep it wet or damp because breathing perlite dust is very dangerous to your health. I pour water into the bag of perlite to keep it damp.

 

Another method for stratification is to sow the seed directly in pots and store the whole pot in a plastic bag or a tray of pots under a humidity dome. The pots with the seeds can be stored in a refrigerator or outside during the winter in a cold garage or other location that stays around refrigerator temperature and is out of the sun. It is OK for the pots to freeze as long as the seeds have not germinated. However, the time frozen does not count toward the four weeks. Seeds planted outside in unprotected pots have a tendency to wander into adjacent pots.

After stratification, sow seed on a peat mix in conveniently sized pots. If you stratified the seed in a plastic bag, spread it over the medium in the pots with your planting spoon. You can use any convenient size pot. Place the seed about 5 mm apart and use a number of pots to keep from having all the seed in one pot. I cover the seeds with sand, about one or two layers of sand deep. Please see Sowing Seeds Step-by-Step for more details on starting seeds.

Put the pots with seeds in plastic bags or under a humidity dome under LED lights. Don't put the bags or domes in direct sun. A temperature of 20째 to 25째C (70째 to 80째F) is ideal. The seeds should germinate in 2 to 4 weeks.

After the seeds germinate and you get a few true leaves, the pots can be removed from the plastic bags or from under a humidity dome. However, you may find it more convenient to keep them under a humidity dome because the pots should never dry out. The pots with the seedlings can also be put in a greenhouse. A sunny window is not enough light. Putting the seedlings outside can be problematic without some sort of protection from inclement weather and creatures.

### Growing juvenile plants
Juvenile Sarracenia can be raised indoors under lights for two years. They need at least 25W of white LED lighting per square foot or 15W of colored (purple or red/blue) LED plant lighting per square foot. The lights should be on for 16 to 18 hours per day. Some growers leave the lights on constantly for the first year and report good results. For the second year, the plants should be on a natural light cycle in sync with the local sunrise and sunset. Use a timer that turns on the lights at local sunrise and off at local sunset. This is important because the plants can lose a year of growth if they are seasonally out of sync when transferred outside.

As the plants grow too large and become crowded in the pots, they will need to be transplanted into larger pots or fewer plants per pot. A good time to make a first pass on keepers is when the plants are one year old. You may need to do it earlier if you planted too many seeds in the pots. After a year and a half, some plants may need to be in 9 cm (3 to 4 inch) pots by themselves, so make sure you have a large enough growing area.


It is common that there is variation among the seedlings within a seed lot. There can be plants that are exceptionally large. There usually are plants that will always stay small and/or grow very slowly. Some of the larger plants can be from accidental hybridization. There have been situations where growers wanting pure species kept the larger, accidental hybrids and tossed the real deal. Some taller plants can be what you want in terms of species or hybrid but have poor form because the pitchers get tall and skinny and fall over. Commercial breeders raise out thousands of plants to find best ones to carry forward. (Hint for newbies: in winter, some large nurseries have sales to unload excess dormant plants from their breeding operations. This can be a great way to start a collection to gain experience in growing Sarracenia.)
